---
layout: post
title: 
date: 2021-11-19 11:23
category: 
author: 
tags: []
summary: 
---

---
layout: post
title: The Game - first draft done!
date: 2021-11-19 10:54
tags: prose
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

Earlier this year I started sketching out ideas for [my new short story about correspondence chess](https://shaisachs.com/2021/01/19/the-game.html). I'm happy to say the first draft is done. [Here it is!](https://shaisachs.gitbook.io/the-game/)

<!--more-->

As I wrote in January, this story is an exploration of [kishōtenketsu](https://shaisachs.com/2021/01/09/kishotenketsu.html), a Japenese story format. It was a pretty interesting experiment for me. I've never been particularly motivated by plot, character development, conflict, or really any of the rudimentary elements of creative writing: I'm much more interested in subtext, symbolism, and meaning. Perhaps that is ultimately a kind of laziness, in that I want to express an idea and don't care to put together a decent story in order to do so? It's not terribly clear to me, but if that's the case, I guess it's fine by me! In some ways writing is a selfish act, and I guess I'm ok with that.

In any case, I found that I really enjoyed the challenge of kishōtenketsu.

The first two parts, while a little tiresome and maybe plodding, were fun and in a way breezy. Here we have a somewhat boring but sympathetic character, doing some rather boring but sympathetic things, with what I hope to be an entertaining voice.

The third part, the non-sequitur whose drama arises from an entirely new narrative voice, was in some ways the easiest to write: I found myself rather didactically writing out some of the thoughts I've had in my head about two rather disparate but important pieces of work. It was all rather prosaic, but I decided to make that third part a piece of kishōtenketsu unto itself because... why not? That was fun.

The last part, in which we resolve the harmony, was relatively quick to write but consumed a fair amount of mental energy over the last two weeks. Having set up this oddball contrast between two very different kinds of characters, I now needed to bring them into harmony. How was I to do that, and how indeed would I do that while imparting the lesson I hoped to impart?

I hope that I've done so in a satisfactory way. The idea that AI is a tool, one which can enhance our thought processes but never replace them: I like to think it came across rather nicely. I hope certainly hope that the story in which this idea is enmeshed winds up being enjoyable and entertaining!