---
layout: post
title: Isaiah 43
date: 2021-07-09 18:22
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
---

I've been reading up a fair amount on Isaiah 43 the last week or so, especially verse 1. There's something kind of captivating about this sentence: "Do not fear, for I have redeemed you; I have called you by name; you are mine." On the one hand it is comforting, on the other hand it is very curious.

What first brought me to this verse is the phrases "I have called you by name; you are mine." At first blush this phrase is altogether strange. We call a lot of people by name, all the time - on the phone with customer service, greeting a friend on the street, and so on. It's a pretty casual act, and certainly doesn't fit with any kind of notion of possession! The notion that names are significant in this way - that knowing someone's name is a kind of power over that person - is a pretty old one. It appears in tales like Rumpelstiltskin, but it seems like something of an anachronism in the modern era.

A broader reading of the passage points at something else; it is not about a name, but rather something like a true, or real, name. The English translation of this verse is something like "I have created thee, Jacob, and formed thee, Israel." That alone is a pretty clear allusion to the story of Jacob's struggle with the angel, the first time that he is given the name Israel. He was "created" as Jacob, but "formed", or given his true shape, through the struggle with the angel. The original Hebrew is still more fascinating: the word used for "created" is בֹּרַאֲךָ, which is the same root as the second word of the Torah, key to the story of creation (בָּרָא); it is perhaps better translated as "brought forth." The second verb (וְיֹצֶרְךָ) is probably best translated as "shaped, molded." Clearly this verse alludes to the story of Jacob's birth, and the story of the struggle with the angel that gave him the name Israel. The idea is that Jacob might have been his name at birth, but Israel is the true name - the one that best reflects who he is and how he was shaped.

Still more interesting is the word "called thee by name." Here again I think the translation is somewhat misleading. The original Hebrew phrase (קָרָאתִי בְשִׁמְךָ) is I think meant to refer to the *second* time Jacob's name is changed, in Genesis 35, where G-d uses the word "וַיִּקְרָא", something like a formal proclamation of the new name. The first time, in Genesis 32, the angel uses the word "יֵאָמֵר", roughly equivalent to "people will say your name is Israel." There's been a lot of commentary about the way Jacob's name changes, twice, and what that could mean, and why the Torah continues to use Jacob's original name after chapter 32. But the distinction is pointed in this case; the wording in Isaiah plainly does not mean "hey, I used your name, isn't that great!" It means something much more akin to "I have proclaimed what your true name is."

In this light, the notion "you are mine" makes a good deal more sense. It is not that the knowledge of someone's name confers some kind of special power; rather, it is that someone with the power to proclaim a true name also has some claim to possession. The arrow of causality is reversed, as it were.

And of course, where does the power to proclaim a name come from?