---
layout: post
title: "Organizing is software: in which the mathematical model of politics gets its due"
date: 2020-02-15 09:45
---

We like to think of politics, at the very least democratic politics, as a mathematical endeavor. X many votes win an election; Y dollars allocated to conservation is a win for the environmental movement; it takes Z number of states to amend the constitution; and so on. It's a model that makes a certain degree of sense, and has its roots in some very old and well-entrenched rules. Unfortunately it's also woefully incomplete, and we lose sight of that to our own peril. Fortunately, there is a better way to think about political organizing, and it's grounded in software development.

I've recently been thinking about this problem in the context of the messy discourse around news, fake news, and fact-based politics. At the heart of this discourse is an old idea embedded in Enlightenment thinking: that as we accumulate more and more facts about the world, the truth comes to light and the path forward becomes more obvious. If you add enough facts into the public conversation, you eventually arrive at the one "correct" conclusion. Hence, if we release enough studies about the dangers of smoking, or carbon dioxide, or what have you, then we will all soon see how imperative it is to regulate tobacco, rein in the fossil fuel industry, etc. Hopefully it's clear by now just how flawed this thinking is. The evidence supporting the need to regulate carbon dioxide emissions is well beyond overwhelming; yet we are very far from the political consensus needed to effectively regulate carbon dioxide and avert the worst effects of global warming. That's only a single example among a whole host of issues ranging from gun control, to income distribution policies, to reproductive choice: the science is damningly obvious, but political consensus lags it dramatically. There are analogues at the more microcosmic world of voter behavior: it's usually very clear which candidate will do the most to benefit a particular voter, and it's also devilishly difficult to get voters to vote for that candidate. If it weren't, the Republican party would be something of a joke, with an appeal limited to two or three hundred people nationwide. To be sure it's possible to stretch the concept of voter self-interest to encompass nebulous ideas like values and identity, but these attempts to resolve voter behavior with the Enlightenment model of the way voters *should* behave amount to circular reasoning. At the end of the day, our Enlightenment-inspired mathematical model of politics is simply flawed.

I like to think of this problem as somewhat akin to the crisis in classical economics. The new field of behavioral economics makes this crisis plain: people do not operate in their own economic self-interest again and again, for a number of reasons. Famously, 401k enrollment procedures are too arcane and inaccessible, so many employees don't enroll, even though the cost of enrollment (an hour or two of paperwork) is overwhelmed by the benefits (thousands of dollars a year, hundreds of thousands over the course of a lifetime.) There are similar problems in purchasing behavior caused by anchoring, performance reviews skewed by recency bias, and so forth.

We have discovered, I think, a new world of politics called behavioral politics, which stipulates that psychological biases exert at least as strong an influence on real-world political behavior as do such classical factors as economic self-interest, political philosophy, and life experience. Hence the lively interest in voting reforms like early voting and same-day registration, which are founded on the notion that our political fortunes will actually change, policy facts on the ground notwithstanding, if we just make voting easier. Likewise the pitched battles about what constitutes actual truth and real news: it's clear that voters do not calmly and rationally evaluate competing claims about reality with an eye towards making the best decision for our shared fate as a society. Biases like the halo effect and tribal identification are at least as important as classical rationality when evaluating news reports and political speeches. And so there is a deep flaw in the notion that adding more facts to the pile, doing more investigative research, and publishing more policy studies, can shift public opinion.

Politics, you might say, is more of an art and than a science.

Perhaps that is self-evident. What is less clear is the particular blend of scientific and artistic skills required to be a successful political organizer. In my view, it's strikingly similar to the blend of skills necessary for successful software programming.

The very best software programmers understand machines and how they work, frightfully well. At the same time they have an exquisite understanding of the way people use machines, and what's more of the way people *should* use machines. Programmers fuse these two skills in order to create great programs that improve the way people use machines for the better. Some of them are exceptionally talented and do so very well, creating such monumental paradigm shifts as Unix pipes or the REST API protocol; others are still honing their craft on relatively simple CRUD applications. But the same basic blend of skills is required throughout.

The best example is the first - Lady Ada Lovelace, the woman so exceptionally far-sighted as to invent computer programming decades before a computer as we know it even existed. She took Charles Babbage's description of the Analytical Engine and, from that very abstract description, produced a software program to [compute the Bernoulli numbers](https://twobithistory.org/2018/08/18/ada-lovelace-note-g.html) - a topic of great interest to mathematicians at the time. The [story of her complex relationship with Babbage](https://www.wired.com/2015/12/untangling-the-tale-of-ada-lovelace/) only underscores the particular art which she brought to bear on the problem. While Babbage was, charitably, something of a eccentric nut, Lovelace was well-grounded in the real world needs of the society of her day. It was precisely those "people" skills which made her the success she was. While we do not often think about software programmers as people with a lot of sharp social skills, that is mostly a cruel stereotype. Closer study of some of the greatest visionaries, ranging from Turing to Hopper to Berners-Lee, reveals artists with deep understanding of the intricate relationship between humans and machines. Even the most workaday software developer today must have some kind of decent relationship with her customer, or perhaps her product manager, in order to successfully execute requirements.

