---
layout: post
title: The third wave of progressive software
---

We are now living through a pivotal moment in the evolution of the progressive software industry. As we approach the one year anniversary of Election Day 2016, it's now clear that the progressive software industry is undergoing a third wave of activity, which may be a sharp departure from previous waves of progressive software development.

The first wave of progressive software was characterized by companies like NGP Software, Voter Activation Network, ActBlue, and Blue State Digital. These companies made modern database-backed web applications available to Democratic campaigns, committees, PACs, and other affiliated groups, with each company staking out the high ground in one functional area or another: NGP Software in campaign finance compliance, VAN in field organizing, and so forth. (NGP Software and VAN later merged, forming NGP VAN, which is where I work now.) By and large the 2004 election cycle was a watershed moment for these companies, with Howard Dean's campaign a particular focal point of activity for many of the principals.

The second wave of progressive software was characterized by the rise of data analytics firms, especially Blue Labs and Civis. These firms made it easy for progressive clients to readily target voters, volunteers, and other constituents along a variety of different characteristics. Once again a presidential election cycle proved pivotal in the formation of this wave; the Obama campaign's keen focus on data analytics was the proving ground for many of the techniques that these firms would go on to commercialize.

The third wave of progressive software is the one we are experiencing today. We are now seeing a flurry of activity in the creation of new apps for use by progressives. While it's a little early yet to predict which firms will emerge as the incumbents from this wave, there are a few fascinating trends taking shape:

1. The bulk of activity seems to be focused on engaging progressive activists, and capturing the enthusiasm of people shocked by some of the worst excesses of the Trump administration. In particular we are seeing quite a few apps which help progressives contact their elected officials, or which make it easy to find rallies and other events where they can get involved in resistance activities.
2. There seems to be tremendous interest in open source software development. Although not all third-wave apps are open source - and indeed, some of the most successful apps are not - the idea that progressive software should be open source seems to have tremendous appeal among third-wave software developers. Of particular note here is the activity of Progressive Coders Network, which is a community of software developers producing software apps of one flavor or another. The network is dedicated to open source principles, and many of the apps in the Progressive Coders umbrella are open source. I'll probably return to this trend in a later blog post, since it seems to me that the actual definition of open source principles, as applied to progressive softwarem is a bit of a conversation these days.
3. The volunteer vs. the entrepreneur. There is a bit of a tension in this movement, because some of the apps in the third wave are being built by a community of volunteers, while others are built by entrepreneurs. To be sure the line between the volunteer and the entrepreneur is somewhat gray; but the separator seems to be the enunciation of a clear business plan among apps built by entrepreneurs on the one hand, and the tendency to give relatively little thought to a business plan, among apps built by volunteers. This tension is certainly related to the popularity of open source software; most volunteer apps are open source, and most private apps are closed source - although there are certainly exceptions on both sides of that rule.
4. The decline of partisanship. Here again the trend is a bit blurry; there are certainly many third-wave apps which will work only with Democratic or progressive clients. But there's also a distinct number of projects which are either explicitly bipartisan, or ambiguous about their partisan identification. By and large this trend appears to be a byproduct of volunteer software development, since partisanship generally requires the formation of a for-profit entity. But there certainly may be other contributing factors.

In some ways this third wave was entirely predictable: each presidential election cycle seems to be somewhat transformative of the industry. The presidential campaign is unique among campaigns because it can amass the critical mass of capital, staff resources, and popular attention to make it possible to try novel experiments. After the campaign is over, the staff who tried those experiments will sometimes move on to commercialize those experiments; and thus a new wave of progressive software companies is born.

What is interesting about this wave is that the lion's share of third-wave apps do not hue to this model very well. Instead what seems to have happened is that the surprise results of the 2016 election shocked and energized a huge number of progressives - and many of those progressives are software developers. It's only natural that many of those developers would try to put their skills, and that seems to be the origin story for a pretty large chunk of third-wave progressive software apps.

Where the third wave will go from here is anyone's guess. It would be easy to predict that entrepreneurial ventures will be more likely to succeed than volunteer ventures, if only because those with a business plan are by definition more likely to form a sustainable enterprise than those without. It would similarly be easy to predict that the future of this wave is very closely tied, in complementary fashion, to the future of the Trump administration. But the past year or so has been nothing if not unpredictable - and so the volunteer-led third-wave may very well be here to stay.