---
layout: bookreview
title: "Matrix"
date: 2021-11-29 13:00
bookfinished: 2021-11-29
rating: 3
---

The Matrix is quite a gripping story about a convent in twelfth-century England, based loosely on the life of Marie de France. On one level it's a rags-to-riches story: the convent is utterly impoverished when Marie arrives, and it's quite a wealthy and powerful quasi-corporation by the end of the story. On another, it's an almost fantastical tale of an improbable feminist utopia that somehow remains independent of the decidedly un-feminist Catholic hierarchy that surrounds it. Finally, the book functions as an argument about Catholic dogma: why shouldn't women be able to celebrate a mass, it seems to ask, among other things.



I enjoyed the book quite a lot, and found it difficult to put down. It's a very unusual setting, which I appreciated, and quite a well-imagined microcosm of an insular but fascinating world. I didn't realize that the book is completely free of male characters until someone pointed that out to me, but now I appreciate it as a work of art that turns the Bechdel test inside out. The characters, too, are cleverly drawn - the queen in particular, who exists mostly through Marie's perspective, emerges as a cunning and fascinating character who is an excellent foil for Marie.



On the other hand, the book gets a bit clunky at times - the device of the labyrinth I found just a bit overbearing, likewise that of flooding the meadow. I'm sure these plot points were both laden with meaning, but I couldn't quite engage with them. The transformation of Marie from a soft-spoken novice into a powerful prioress seemed rather abrupt, the lais she wrote to her queen too vague and ephemeral. The argumentation about Catholic dogma is, I suspect, extremely interesting for those who understand it - but it can be a bit inaccessible for those who don't.



It's certainly a worthwhile and fascinating read, one way or the other - and it's definitely a great way to learn about some corners of history that tend to get overlooked!